R-TYPE_
< A GAME ENGINE THAT ROARS ! />

R-TYPE

Preliminaries
binary: r-type_server, r-type_client
language: C++
build: CMake, package manager

This project of the Advanced C++ knowledge unit will introduce you to networked video game development, and will give you the opportunity to explore advanced development techniques as well as to learn
good software engineering practices.
The goal is to implement a multi-threaded server and a graphical client for a well-known legacy video game
called R-Type, using a game engine of your own design.
First, you will develop the core architecture of the game and deliver a working prototype, and in a second
time, you will expand several aspects the prototype to the next level, exploring specialized areas of your
choice from a list of proposed options.

1

R-Type, the Game
For those of you who may not know this best-selling video game, here is a little introduction.

This game is informally called a Horizontal Shmup (or simply, a Shoot'em'up), and while R-Type is not the
first one of its category, it has been a huge success amongst gamers in the 90's, and had several ports,
spin-offs, and 3D remakes on modern systems.
Other similar and well-known games are the Gradius series and Blazing Star on Neo Geo.
In this project, you have to make your own version of R-Type, with additional requirements not featured
in the original game:
3 It MUST be a networked game, where several players will be able to fight the evil Bydos;
3 Its internal design MUST demonstrate architectural features of a real game engine.

2

Project Organization
This project is split in two parts, each part leading to a Delivery and evaluated in a dedicated Defense.
Additionally, there is also a common part that will be evaluated at both defenses.
This document is structured according to the following plan :
3 Common part: Software Engineering, Documentation, and Accessibility Requirements
This part defines the expectations in terms of Software Engineering, Documentation, and Accessibility your
project must have. Topics such as technical documentation, build system tooling, 3rd-party dependencies
handling, development workflow, and packaging will be addressed.
This part have to be a continuous effort, and not something done at the very end of the project. As such,
each project defense will take into account the work that have been done on this topic.
3 Part 1: Software Architecture & First Game prototype
The goal of the first part is to develop the core foundations and software architecture of your networked
game engine, allowing you to create and deliver a first working game prototype.
The deadline for this first delivery and defense is 4 weeks after the beginning of the project.
3 Part 2: Advanced Topics : from game prototype to infinity and beyond!
The goal of this second part is to enhance different aspects of your prototype, bringing your final delivery to
a more mature level. There is 3 technical tracks you may want to work on: Advanced Software Architecture,
Advanced Networking, and/or Advanced Gameplay and Game Design.
You will have opportunity choose which topics you want to work on, finally leading you to the final delivery
of the project.
The deadline for this final delivery and defense is 3 weeks after the first delivery, for a total of 7 full weeks
for the whole project

3

Software Engineering Requirements
3 The project MUST use CMake as its build system.
3 The project MUST use a Package Manager to handle 3rd-party dependencies.
The package manager can be one of:
- Conan
- Vcpkg
- CMake CPM
The goal is to have the project fully self-contained: it has to be built and run without altering anything on
the system. In other terms, the project must not rely on system-wide installed libraries or development
headers , except for the standard C++ compilers and SDKs, and some low-level and platform-specific
libraries (such as OpenGL or X11 libraries for example).

Copying the full dependencies source code straight into your repository is NOT considered to be a
proper method of handling dependencies !
3 The project MUST run on Linux, for both the client and the server.
3 The project SHOULD be Cross-Platform.
In addition to Linux, it has to run on Windows using Microsoft Visual C++ compiler.

Neither MacOS nor WSL count as Cross-Platform as they are both UNIX-like systems or environments.

A true cross-platform game allows to run the server and the client on both Windows and Linux, and ”crossplay” between clients of different OSes.
It should be noted that deciding to implement cross-platform have major impacts on development, and
this is something to be tackled early on to succeed.
3 A well-defined software development workflow MUST be used
You are expected to use good development practices, and in particular, you have to adopt good Git usage
and practices: feature branches, merge requests, issues, tags for important milestones, commits content
and description, etc.
It is even better if a CI/CD workflow is used, to build, test, and even deploy the server.
4

DO NOT put a full-time dedicated member on the CI/CD, as this is a very time-consuming task for
this project.
DO NOT fetch the full dependencies after each commit, otherwise you'll break the CI/CD quota very
soon. There is methods to handle this in more clever ways (caches, preconfigured build-images,
etc.).

Another aspect to consider is the usage of specific tools such as C++ linters or formatters (for example,
clang-tidy and clang-format), as they help to spot common programming errors, and enforce a common
style.

Documentation Requirements
Documentation is not your preferred task, we all know it ! However, documentation is also the first thing
you'll want to look for if you needed to dive into a new project.
The idea is to provide the essential documentation elements that you'd be happy to see if you wanted to
contribute yourself to a project for a new team.

You MUST write the documentation in English.

This includes:
3 First and foremost, the README file !
This is the first thing every developer will see: this is your project public facade. So, better to have it done
properly.
It has to be short, nice, practical, and useful, with typical information such as project purpose, dependencies/requirements/supported platforms, build and usage instructions, license, authors/contacts, useful
links or quick-start information, and so on.
3 The Developer Documentation
This is the part you don't like. But think about it: its main purpose is to help new developers to dive in the
project and understand how it works in a broad way (and not in the tiny details, the code is here for this).
5

No need to be exhaustive or verbose, it has to be practical before anything else.
The following kind of information are typically what you'll need:
3 Architectural diagrams (a typical ”layer/subsystem” view common in video games)
3 Main systems overviews and description, and how this materializes in the code
3 Tutorials and How-To's.
Contribution guidelines and coding conventions are very useful too. They allow new developers to know
about your team conventions, processes and expectations.
Having a good developer documentation will demonstrate to the evaluator that you have a good understanding of your project, as well as the capacity to communicate well with other developers.

Note that generating documentation from source code comments like with the Doxygen tool, while it
is a good practice, can't be considered alone to be a real project documentation. You MUST produce
documentation at a higher level than only just classes/functions descriptions !
3 The Technical and Comparative Study
You are expected to explain the relevance of using the various technologies you are employing (programming language, graphics library, algorithms, networking techniques, etc...).
A good approach is to conduct a comparative study of the technologies to justify each of your choices, in
particular based on the different axes below:
Algorithms and Data Structures: you should be able to explain your selection of existing algorithms,
design patterns, and data structures for the project, as well as your selection of new and custom-designed
algorithms, and why you needed to develop those.
Storage: a study of different storage techniques should be included in your comparative study, regarding
persistence, reliability, and storage constraints.
Security: security and data integrity must be managed and secured effectively. In your comparative study,
it might be relevant to consider the main vulnerabilities of each technology. Also, explain how you implemented the security monitoring of those technologies, in the long term.
3 The documentation have to be available and accessible in a modern way.
Documents such as PDF or .docx are not really how documentation is delivered nowadays. It is more
practical to read documentation by navigating online through a set of properly interlinked structured pages,
with a quick-access outline somewhere, a useful search bar, and content indexed by search engines.
Documentation generator tools are designed for this, allowing to generate a static website from source
documentation files. Online Wikis are also an interesting alternative geared toward collaborative work.
6

Examples: markdown, reStructuredText, Sphinx, Gitbook, Doxygen, Wikis, etc.
There is many possibilities nowadays, making legacy documents definitively obsolete.

3 Protocol documentation
This project is a network game: as such, the communication protocol is a critical part of the system. Documentation of the network protocol shall describe the various commands and packets sent over the network
between the server and the client. Someone SHOULD be able to write a new client for your server, just by
reading the protocol documentation.

Communication protocols are usually more formal than usual developer documentation, and classical documents are acceptable for this purpose. Writing an RFC is a good idea.

Accessibility Requirements
The project, including its documentation, must be accessible to people with disabilities. Here are the usual
disability categories you have to think about (non-exhaustive list):
3 Physical and Motor Disabilities
3 Audio and Visual Disabilities
3 Mental and Cognitive Disabilities
For each of these categories, what solution are you providing ? Try to draw inspiration from existing features and settings in actual games, there is many ways to handle this. You may also integrate these aspects
into your comparative study.

7

Part 1: Software Architecture & First Game
Prototype
The first part of the project focus on building the core foundations of your game engine, and develop your
first R-Type prototype.
The general goals are the following:
3 The game MUST be playable at the end of this part: with a nice star-field in background, players
spaceships confront waves of enemy Bydos, everyone shooting missiles to try to get down the opponent.
3 The game MUST be a networked game: each player use a distinct Client program on the network,
connecting to a central Server having final authority on what is happening in the game.
3 The game MUST demonstrate the foundations of a game engine, with at least visible and decoupled
subsystems/layers for Rendering, Networking, and Game Logic.

8

Server
The server implements all the game logic. It acts as the authoritative source of game logic events in the
game: whatever the server decides, the clients have to comply with it.

On a typical and simplified client/server video game architecture, the Clients sends local user inputs to the Server, which processes them and update the game world, and send back regular game
updates to all Clients. In turn the Clients renders the updated game world on the screen.
There is however many variations around this basic principle, and you have to design your solution.

3 The server MUST notify each client when a monster spawns, moves, is destroyed, fires, kills a player,
and so on..., as well as notifies others clients' actions (a player moves, shoots, etc.).
3 The server MUST be multithreaded, so that it does not block or wait for clients messages, as the
game must run frame after frame on the server regardless of clients' actions.
3 If a client crashes for any reason, the server MUST continue to work and MUST notify other clients
in the same game that a client crashed. More generally, the server must be robust and be able to run
regardless of what's wrong might happen.
3 You MAY use the Asio library for networking, or rely on OS-specific network API (eg. Unix BSD Sockets
on Linux for example, or Windows Sockets on Windows).

In case you decide to use low level sockets provided by the system, you MUST encapsulate them
with proper abstractions !

9

Client
The client is the graphical display of the game.
It MUST contain anything necessary to display the game and handle player input, while everything related
to gameplay logic shall occur on the server.
The client MAY nevertheless run parts of the game logic code, such as local player movement or missile
movements, but in any case the server MUST have authority on what happens in the end. This is particularly true for any kind of effect that have a great impact on gameplay (death of an enemy/player, pickup of
an item, etc.): all players have to play the same game, whose rules are driven by the server.
You may use the SFML for rendering/audio/input/network, but other libraries can be used (such as SDL
or Raylib for example). However, libraries with a too broad scope, or existing game engines (UE, Unity,
Godot, etc.) are strictly forbidden.
Here is a description of the official R-Type screen:

3 1: Player
3 2: Monster
3 3: Monster (that spawns a powerup upon death)
3 4: Enemy missile
3 5: Player missile
3 6: Stage obstacles
3 7: Destroyable tile
3 8: Background (starfield)

10

Protocol
You MUST design a binary protocol for client/server communications.
A binary protocol, in contrast with a text protocol, is a protocol where all data is transmitted in binary format, either as-is from memory (raw data) or with some specific encoding optimized for data transmission.

The protocol MUST be binary. Please read on the internet for differences between binary and text
protocols.

You MUST use UDP for communications between the server and the clients. A second connection using
TCP can be tolerated for specific cases, but you must provide a strong justification. In any case, ALL ingame communications (entities, movements, events) MUST use UDP.

UDP works differently than TCP, be sure to understand well the difference between datagramoriented communication VS stream-oriented communication.

Think about your protocol completeness, and in particular, the handling of erroneous messages, or buffer
overflows. Such malformed messages or packets MUST NOT lead the client or server to crash, consume
excessive memory, or compromise server security.
You MUST document your protocol. See the section on documentation for more information about what
is expected for the protocol documentation.

11

Game Engine
You've now been experimenting with C++ and Object-Oriented Design for a year. That experience means
you should be able to create abstractions and write re-usable code.
Therefore, before you begin work on your game, it is important that you start by creating a prototype game
engine !
The game engine is the core foundation of any video game: it determines how you represent an object
in-game, how the coordinate system works, and how the various systems of your game (graphics, physics,
network...) communicate.
When designing your game engine, decoupling is the most important thing you should focus on. The
graphics system of your game only needs an entity appearance and position to render it: it doesn't need
to know about how much damage it can deal or the speed at which it can move ! Think of the best ways to
decouple the various systems in your engine.

We recommend taking a look at the Entity-Component-System architectural pattern, as well as the
Mediator design pattern. But there are many other ways to implement a game engine, from common
Object-Oriented paradigms to full Data Driven ones. Be sure to look for articles on the Internet.

12

Gameplay
The client MUST display a slow horizontal scrolling background representing space with stars, planets...
This is the star-field.
The star-field scrolling, entities behavior, and overall time flow must NOT be tied to the CPU speed. Instead, you MUST use timers.
Players MUST be able to move using the arrow keys.
There MUST be Bydos slaves in your game, as well as missiles.
Monsters MUST be able to spawn randomly on the right of the screen.
The four players in a game MUST be distinctly identifiable (via color, sprite, etc.)
R-Type sprites are freely available on the Internet, but a set of sprites is available with this subject.
Finally, think about basic sound design in your game. This is important for a good gameplay experience.
This is the minimum, you can add anything you feel will get your game closer to the original.

13

Part 2: Advanced Topics
Now that you have a working game prototype, it's time to explore new grounds and take opportunity to
have a deep dive in advanced software development topics.
Three ”tracks” are presented in this document, each divided in different topics. You may choose any tracks
and subtopics to work on.
You are working as a Team, and a lot of the topics presented are orthogonal to each other. As such, there
is definitively room for each team member to work on the second part, possibly in parallel on different
completely unrelated features.
So, take a deep breath, read everything in this second part, discuss with your team, discuss with your
pedagogical team, choose your favorite topics... and solve real-world problems !

Due to the scope of this part, bear in mind not everything have to be done to validate the project.
However, it is expected some significant work to be done on one or more topics and features.

14

Track #1: Advanced Architecture - Building a real game engine
Nowadays, most games are built upon a ”Game Engine”. To put it simply, a Game Engine is what's left of
your codebase, after you've removed the game rules, world and assets. A game engine could be specialized for a specific genre (e.g. Bethesda Creation Engine was made to build 3D RPG with branching story
line), or general purpose (e.g. Unity).

Track Goals

In this track, the goal is to continue the design of your game engine, in order to deliver a well-defined
engine, with proper abstractions, decoupling, features and tools.
The next document section presents features most engines have.

We don't necessarily want you to develop every features by yourself. You should not hesitate to
ask your local unit manager to use 3rd party libraries for some advanced features (UI rendering,
advanced physics, hardware support, etc.)

In a second step, you'll want to make the game engine a generic and reusable building block, delivered
as a separate and standalone project, completely independent of your original R-Type game.
That is, your R-Type game will be using the engine as a library dependency, while the engine itself knows
nothing about anything related to the game logic/assets/functionalities of R-Type.
To demonstrate that your game engine is fully generic and standalone, the ultimate goal is to create a 2nd
sample game (different from R-Type !), using your standalone game engine. With this, you can prove it is
really a reusable and generic system, on which you can build various games on top of it.

You don't have to implement a 2nd full-fledged game to validate this goal. Think of it as a demo
for you engine features. However, the quality of the 2nd game will be evaluated: from a basic
pong game, to a full-fledged completely different game like a Mario clone, and all the variations
in-between.

Game Engine Features
Here is a list of the most essential features a solid game engine might have. The quantity and quality of
subsystems and features in your engine will be evaluated, as well as anything additional and relevant not
mentioned in the following list.

15

Modularity

A good engine should not take more memory space than needed, both on a consumer disk and in memory
during runtime. A good way to achieve this is through modularization. Here are some common way to
build a modular game-engine:
3 compile time: The developer choose which module it will compile from your engine, using flags in
their build system or their package manager;
3 link-time: The engine is built as several libraries, the developer can then choose to link with;
3 run-time plugin API: Module are built as shared-object libraries, that are either loaded from a given
path or given a configuration at the start of the game, or loaded/unloaded as needed during runtime.

Engine Subsystems

Rendering Engine
As the rendering engine is in charge of displaying information on the screen, what kind of games one can
make is tightly dependent on its features (2.5D or 3D module, Particle system, Pre-made UI elements, ...).
Physics engine
The physics engine primary goal is to handle collisions and gravity. More advanced engine can also allow
to make entities deform, break, bounce, etc.
Audio Engine
A basic audio engine is in charge of playing background audio during gameplay. More advanced one include
some SFX, from click noise in UI, to in-game noise. They can also handle positions-aware sounds in some
games.
Human-Machine interface
In most case, the engine is responsible for handling control devices, so the developer only have to specify
which on they intend to use. This can go from simple feature such as setting up the keyboard and gamepad,
to more advanced or integrated one, such as firing an event on a click on some UI element, supporting a
touchpad, or referencing a key by its physical location instead of the letter, to better support different
layout.
Message passing interface
As games are more and more advanced, the number of different systems interacting make both the synchronisation and communication more difficult to manage in a decoupled way. A message passing interface is a way to fix some of these issue, as most interaction is then handled via a system of events. Basic
one allow for simple asynchronous event, while more advanced one can take priority, answer and even
synchronous message when needed.
Resources & asset management
Proper resource management is a tedious task, as such it's often left to the engine, the game only referencing them by IDs or name. Common resource management scheme include preloading (load screen),

16

or on the fly loading, letting the engine manage a resource cache.
Scripting
In most game, entity behaviors are deferred to external scripts, as they allow for quicker test/development cycles (no need to re-compile). As such, most engine support script integration (either via custom
language, or interpreter integration).

LUA or Python are typically used as scripting systems

Tooling

Other than the aforementioned features, most game engine also provide some tools to the developer.
These can be quality of life tools, debug or even a full-fledged IDE.
Developer console
Most user will know this feature in off-line game. While primarily used as a way to trigger actions, scripts
or sounds during a testing phase, it's often left in the game to enable ”cheating”, or to help modders. It
also introduces the concept of customizable Console Variables (aka. ”CVars”).
In-game metrics and profiling
These features are most commonly used for benchmarking, or to debug specific area, and can contain a
range of useful metrics such as world position, resource usage (CPU, Memory), Frame per Seconds (FPS),
or Lagometer (network latency, dropped frames), etc.
World/scene/assets Editor
This can be standalone, or activated by a special flag at compile-time or runtime, and is used to place
assets on the world, leveraging both the physics and rendering engine to be as close as possible to what
would be possible during gameplay. It's also a quick-way to create new levels or to set up an in-game
cinematic.
The quality of the editor(s) will be evaluated: from a very simplistic solution using only configuration files,
to a fully fledged interactive drag-and-drop graphical application.

17

Track #2: Advanced Networking - Building a reliable network game
The goal of this track is to enhance the server and networking subsystems of your game engine, matching
with functionalities actually implemented in your favorites games.
This track offers 3 topics you might want to work on: Multi-instance Server, Data Transmission Efficiency
and Reliability, and High-level Networking Engine Architecture.

Multi-instance Server

Most dedicated game servers are able to handle several game instances in parallel, and not only one as
you have already developed up to this point.
With the possibility to have several game instances running, there is the need to bring various functionalities to manage them, handle the concurrency, provide methods to let users connect to the server, see the
instances, join the games, discuss, etc.
The idea is to bring such functionalities into your project. Here are some topics that you may investigate:
3 The ability for the server to run several different game instances in parallel;
3 A Lobby/Room system, typically used for matchmaking, or simply instances discoverability;
3 Users and identities management: storage, sessions, authentication, etc.;
3 Communication between users: text chat, or even voice;
3 Game rules management: change some basic game rules, per game instance;
3 Global scoreboard and/or ranking system;
3 Administration dashboard: text-mode console interface (example: an admin can kick/ban a specific
user), or even web-based interface.

Data Transmission Efficiency and Reliability

In your current prototype the Server is probably sending updates to each client 60x/seconds for all entities
in the world, without deeper technical consideration. While on a local network it should offer a reasonable
experience, over the Internet this might be a quite different story.
Due to inevitable network issues such as low bandwidth, network latency, congestion, or unreliability
(packet losses, out of order packets, duplication), the game might face some serious synchronization problems leading to suboptimal gameplay experience, or worst, full disconnections.
So, the general question to answer on this topic is: what mechanisms can you provide to help mitigate on
those network issues ? Here are some of the common topics that you may want to investigate:
3 Data packing

18

Plain in-memory data sent ”as-is” over the network can be really inefficient, even if using a binary protocol.
The usual layout of data in memory is not necessarily optimized for data transmission, because of primitive
data types that may be too large, internal padding of structure fields optimized by the compiler for CPU
alignment and not for data transmission, etc.

Hints: adequate data types sizes, space-efficient serialization, bit-level packing, structs alignment
and padding optimization, data quantization, etc.

3 General-purpose data compression
In data transmission there is generally a lot of redundancy. Using general purpose encodings and compression algorithms is an interesting way to reduce bandwidth usage. Additionally, a few compression
techniques are tailored specifically for games.

Hints: for general purpose algorithms, RLE (Run Length Encoding), Huffman encoding, LZ4, zlib. For
games-specific techniques: delta snapshot compression.

3 Network errors mitigation (packets drops, reordering, duplication)
The UDP protocol is unreliable, and in case of heavy network congestion, packets may be lost, throttled,
reordered, or even duplicated. The game might suffer a lot from these issues. You should provide means
to prevent any kind of issues caused by UDP unreliability.
3 Message reliability
Following the previous point, even though some UDP datagrams might be lost, various messages MUST
be sent/received reliably (example: connection to a game instance, a player is dead, etc.).

Hints: dedicated TCP channel for reliable message delivery, ”ACK” patterns for UDP, message duplication.

19

High-level Networking Engine Architecture

Fast-paced networked video games such as R-Type or any FPS are fundamentally real-time distributed
simulations over a network.
The central design issue of such programs is that their state (i.e. the ”game world” in our case) needs to
be consistent across each individual participant of the simulation (i.e. Clients and the Server), in real-time,
BUT there is an incompressible communication latency between them, familiarly called ”lag”.
As such, any information sent, such as a player move or a game update, will be received by others slightly
in the future, and any information received from others will come slightly from the past. Basically, it
means that at any given point in time, each participant have a slightly different version of the world than
the others.
Yet, the mission of the game developers is to give the illusion everything is happening in a consistent and
efficient way... Tricky topic!
This paradox explain what you regularly observe in your favorite network game sessions: players and
entities positions are sometimes unstable or ”teleports” inconsistently, there can be some annoying input
lag or lack of responsiveness, or more frustrating, you are sometime killed while hidden behind a wall.
3 Possible solutions
As our architecture is based around a central Authoritative source of truth, the Server, there is several
possible solutions to address the problem. As usual, a pragmatic solution lies in-between two opposite
approaches between game state consistency and networking performance. The following hint box gives
some keyword to look for, about various techniques usually implemented in networked video games.

Hints: client-side prediction with server reconciliation, low frequency server updates with entity
state interpolation, server-side lag compensation, input delaying, rollback netcode.

You are expected to be able to give and demonstrate real measurements in terms of bandwidth
usage, responsiveness in front of lag)

20

Track #3: Advanced Gameplay - Building a Fun and complete video game
The goal of this track is to enhance the Gameplay and Game Design aspects of your game.
Up to this point, your R-Type should be a working prototype with a limited set of functionalities and content
gameplay wise. Let's change this, and make your game more enjoyable for final players AND for game
designers !

Players: elements of Gameplay

While R-Type is an old game, it is nevertheless feature-complete game: with many monsters, levels,
weapons, and other gameplay elements. You should move your prototype to the next level gameplaywise. It should be fun to play!
Elements you might consider:
3 Monsters, with varying movement patterns and attacks. Example: the snake-style monsters as in
level 2 of R-Type, or ground turrets.
3 Levels, with different themes, and interesting gameplay twists. Look at the level 3 of original R-Type:
you are fighting with a huge vessel during the whole level, or level 4 with monsters leaving solid
trails behind them.
3 Bosses. They are legendary in the R-Type lore, and played a significant role in the game success. In
particular the idiomatic first boss, frequently pictured on the game boxes: the Dobkeratops.
3 Weapons. For example, the Force plays an integral part in the original game: it can be attached to
front or back of the player (and when attached back, it shoots backwards), can be ”detached” and
acts independently, can be re-called back, it protects the player from enemy missiles, allow to shoot
super-charged missiles, etc.
3 Gameplay rules: is it interesting to let users change or tweak the game rules. Think about things
such as friendly-fire, bonuses availability, difficulty, game modes (”coop”, ”versus”, ”pvp”, etc.)
3 Sound design. This plays an integral role in any gameplay experience: music (or even better, procedural music), environmental effects, sound effects, etc.

Inspire yourself from the existing game:
- Gameplay overview
- Individual Stage breakdown in particular.

21

The grading will not evaluate only quantitatively, but also qualitatively: having N or M kind of element is not the only things that matters. Having reusable subsystems to add content easily is
equally important. See the next section.

Game Designers: content creation tools

Having a lot of content is great, but having great tools allowing to create easily new content is even better.
Game Designers are not necessarily seasoned developers, and it is very useful for them to be able to easily
add new content into the game. The need to know C++ and modify many files of your project (possibly
having to recompile everything when they add a new level or boss for example) is generally a showstopper.
Your game engine SHOULD provide well-defined APIs allowing for runtime extensibility (e.g. plugin system, Dlls) to add new content, standard formats, or even a dedicated scripting language to program entities
behaviors.

Example: Lua programming language is frequently use in video games.

The general question to answer is: how easy it is to add new content and behaviors in the game ? Of
course, knowing C++ can be a requirement, but the system should be simple enough to be used on a daily
basis by people with limited development skills.
It is even better if you have content editor tools for various game elements (level-editor, monster editor,
etc.). Those could be separate programs, or embedded directly in the main game. See the related section
in the ”Advanced Architecture” track for more information on this topic.
In all cases, having solid and useful tools or content creation subsystems is equally important to having a
lot of content: there is no point to have 5 levels if each level require heavy modification of internals of the
base game. It is better to have only 2 levels, and demonstrate to the evaluator that your system can be
used to add any level you want easily.

Documentation is a critical part of any content creation tool, API, or subsystem. Tutorials and HowTo's in particular are definitively what content creators are looking for.

22

v 4.2-dev

